---
v: 3

title: Ownership and licensing statements in YANG
abbrev: Owner and Licensing Statements
docname: draft-ietf-opsawg-ol-08
category: std
consensus: true
submissiontype: IETF
updates: 8520

keyword: Internet-Draft

author:
 -  name: Eliot Lear
    org: Cisco Systems
    street: Richtistrasse 7
    code: CH-8304
    city: Wallisellen
    country: Switzerland
    phone: "+41 44 878 9200"
    email: lear@cisco.com
 -  name: Carsten Bormann
    org: Universität Bremen TZI
    street: Postfach 330440
    city: Bremen
    code: D-28359
    country: Germany
    email: cabo@tzi.org

normative:
   RFC8520: mud
   IANA.mud:
   SPDX:
     title: The Software Package Data Exchange® (SPDX®) Specification Version 2.3
     author:
       org: The Linux Foundation
     date: 2022
     target: https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/

informative:

--- abstract

This memo provides for an extension to RFC 8520 (Manufacturer Usage
Description Specification, MUD) that allows
MUD file authors to specify ownership and licensing of MUD
files themselves.  This memo updates RFC 8520.  However, it
can also be used for purposes outside of MUD, and the grouping
is structured as such.

--- middle

Introduction
============

{{RFC8520}} Manufacturer Usage Descriptions (MUD) can be used to
describe devices and their requirements to the network infrastructure.
The original version of the specification does not provide for a
means to specify ownership and licensing of the MUD file itself.  This
can hinder those wishing to use, modify, or adapt MUD files for the
purpose of offering them, when the manufacturer is not involved.

* **Issue**: Should this be an owner or an originator?

To avoid any confusion, we define an extension that allows for
specifying of owners and licensing terms for MUD files.

Those generating MUD files SHOULD use this extension, and
thus this extension updates RFC 8520.

There are two ways to specify a license: a URL pointing to the license
itself or an SPDX tag {{SPDX}}.  If an SPDX tag is supplied consumers
MUST interpret that tag through its meaning as specified by {{SPDX}}.

* **Issue**: Should we simply say that a URI contains a colon and SPDX
  license identifier doesn't?

This grouping may be used for other YANG models that reside as
static objects.

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

The owner-license extension and model
======================================

Because the model is primarily motivated by MUD, and based
on the way that YANG trees are formed, the model appears as
an augmentation for MUD.

~~~~~~~~~ yangtree
{::include yang.tree}
~~~~~~~~~


* **Issue**: Should different owners possibly have their own license
  types?  (Logical and, derived works.)
* **Issue**: Should a single owner possibly have multiple license
  types?  (Logical or, multi-licensing.)


The YANG schema for ownership and licensing
============================

The following grouping and augmentation are proposed.

~~~~~ yang
{::include ietf-ol.yang}
~~~~~
{: sourcecode-markers='true' sourcecode-name='ietf-ol@2024-04-26.yang'}

Extension for MUD
=================

MUD files using this extension MUST include "ol" in the extensions
array, as specified by {{RFC8520}}.

Example
=======

In this example, the Frobmaster company is using the 0BSD SPDX
tag to indicate a relatively open license.  The "ol" extension
and container are present.  There is a single owner listed.

~~~~~~~~ json
{::include example.json}
~~~~~~~~

* **Task**: need Makefile for validating this against MUD.
  (Probably put this into a separate file, too.)

* **Issue**: Should we give an example for usage outside yang?

Security Considerations
=======================

The security considerations of {{Section 16 of -mud}} with respect to
obtaining validation for information claimed in a MUD file do apply.
While the information described in this specification is not intended
to directly influence the behavior of protective infrastructure, it
may be used by an aggregator as input for deciding the legal basis
that enables providing aggregated information; depending on the
juridical environment, false information in the MUD file may thus
expose the aggregator to additional legal risk.

IANA Considerations
===================

MUD Extension
-------------

The IANA is requested to add "ol" to the
{{mud-extensions (MUD extensions registry)<IANA.mud}} of {{IANA.mud}}
as follows:

{:vspace}
Extension Name: 
: ol

Standard reference:
: This document

## XML Name Space Entry

This document requests IANA to register the following URI in the "ns"
subregistry within the "IETF XML Registry" in accordance with {{!RFC3688}}:

{:vspace}

URI:
: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-ol

Registrant Contact:
: The IESG.

XML: N/A; the requested URI is an XML namespace.

## YANG Module Names

This document requests IANA to register the following YANG module in
the "YANG Module Names" subregistry in accordance with {{!RFC6020}}
within the "YANG Parameters" registry.

{:vspace}

name:
: ietf-ol
namespace:
: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-ol
maintained by IANA:
: N
prefix:
: ol
reference:
: RFC XXXX

--- back


Changes from Earlier Versions
=============================

Draft -02:

  * Small updates to the example

Draft -01:

  * Format IANA considerations
  * Discuss security considerations

Draft -00:

  * Resubmit unchanged

Individual Draft -01:

  * Add some issues
  * correct spacing

Individual Draft -00:

  * Initial revision
